13 billion years
ago the universe
exploded into
existence, expanded out
in every direction for
approximately a billion years,
swirled itself into
100 trillion galaxies.
Galaxies that
formed new elements
in the hearts of their stars.
Stars that exploded
with new element
rich clouds of stellar
nebulae that could then
swirl back into
second generation
stars with planets around them.
Planets with the inner
genius and creativity
that they could bring forth
oceans and atmosphere,
the first cells of life, all
of the creatures that we know.
Every civilization, or every
culture, has a mythology.
I remember the old story.
It goes like this—
do you want to you hear this?
It goes like this.
That answers the basic
questions: Who are you?
What is a human being?
What's important in life?
How does change
happen in the world?
Where do we come from?
Where are we going?
The sky father had an affair
with the woman who is the sea.
And there life began as
the single celled organism,
the coral polyp.
The Vedic science
story starts out
the universe is consciousness
which slows down
into matter and
everything therefore
evolves within that
consciousness field.
Life is a hoop.
And every single life form
has one place on this hoop.
And the five fingered ones
have the tremendous honour
of being one part of that hoop.
One of the problems
with the old story
within Western
culture is that it’s
perpetuated a
sense of separation
between humans and the
planet, between humans
and the natural world.
We are one with Mother Earth,
we are one with the cosmos,
we are one with the universe.
There is never a disconnection.
And the world is
the way it is today
because of the stories we have
communicated to each other.
Stories are the
library of humanity.
And we need to refer
to them because
we've, in essence,
captured all the wisdom we
have in our stories.
But we must be careful
what we wish for.
For every story limits as much
as it illumines and defines.
Western science
started out with a story
of a non-living, meaningless,
purposeless universe.
It then discovered entropy.
It said it’s all running down.
Okay, this is the
bleakest creation story
anyone ever thought up.
It’s all a question of story.
We are in trouble just
now because we do not
have a good story.
We are in between stories.
♪ There are
many, there are many,
♪ there are many voices calling.
♪ Who can hear the mother,
hear the mother crying.
♪ Whoa come on now, whoa
it’s time, it’s time
♪ to care for Earth.
♪ Whoa come on now, whoa
it’s time, it’s time
♪ to care for Earth.
The thought of
Thomas Berry who was
an American ecological
and cosmological thinker
and writer.
And when I encountered
the work of Thomas Berry,
and then I had the opportunity
to study with Thomas Berry
and have him as a
mentor for 20 years,
he was talking about
the power of worldview.
He wrote an essay in 1978
called “The New Story“
in which he said it’s
all a question of story.
We are in trouble just
now because we do not
have a good story.
We have come to believe that
nature is separate from us,
and we are separate from nature.
Nature’s out there, and we
can do what we like to nature.
We can cut down the rainforests.
We can put animals
in factory farms
and slaughter them as we like.
We can overfish the oceans.
We can pollute the rivers.
We can pollute the water
and change climate.
We can do what we like.
But we are somehow
superior to nature.
We are somehow rulers of nature.
That’s the old story.
The strangest of all beliefs
which is that as humans on this
planet we cannot help but
destroy the planet while we are
living on it.
We are putting so much
pressure on the environment,
so much pressure on
poor people, so much
pressure on the atmosphere.
Global warming.
Climate change.
So our glaciers were
receding very fast.
And the weather changed very
quickly in the last three years
for us.
Even it snowed in
the desert this year.
With the mining of oil,
with the shale gas industry,
fracking.
Chainsaws, and bulldozers,
and chemical sprays.
The lungs of our planet
being destroyed at a rate
that leaves one breathless.
All of this for the resources
for which without we would not
have laptops, we would
not have cell phones,
and the many gadgets
that we depend on today.
We live in a very,
very brutal system.
Not only brutal toward
those that we can easily
see as victims, but equally
brutal toward the perpetrators.
Otherwise, how would they
become the perpetrators?
You know, what has to happen
to a human being for them
to do the things that
people do to each other?
Every four seconds a child
in Africa is starving.
In our normality,
all of us, a girl,
her genital parts are cut so
she does not enjoy sexuality.
A woman is raped.
A woman in my country is killed
because her husband or brother
is jealous—what’s called
the honour of the family.
In the normality, a
field of Pachamama
is spread with chemicals,
and another part of her body
is getting rotten.
People are being
killed as we speak here
for diamonds, gold, copper,
cobalt, coltan, silver,
uranium.
We live in a for-profit
world, essentially.
It’s a market based
economy, and success
is measured by your
return on investment,
by your market share, by
your level of profitability,
by margins, all of these things.
That’s the deal.
Just the narrative
to just get a job,
and make money, and play
the capitalistic game,
it’s not working
for young people.
Today’s young people don’t
want to just work, work, work.
All the kids, we were
at war against the teachers,
they were at war against us.
And it was all based on
massive harm and destruction,
psychological and
violent, physical harm.
Because when you
grew up in gangs
in a very angry,
controlled environment,
I had to learn to fight
and defend myself in ways
I didn’t realise I had to.
Because I was black, you
know, I had this history
that I had to fight for that
I did not know anything about.
And we’re born with
this perception,
I would call it a knowing,
that gets beaten out of us.
And that’s a very
painful process,
to be ejected from
a magical world.
♪ Wait a minute,
is that the ocean I smell?
♪ And my heart moves to the
rhythm of a big blue swell.
♪ From the top of the atmosphere,
to the deep I dive,
♪ and I know that our
children will survive.
♪ There are things that we
can count on in our lives.
♪ Wait a minute.
To the story of our future.
The future records written
in the fossils of this planet
will actually record a time
of great turning, a time
of incredible self awareness.
This event, of New
Story Summit at Findhorn,
is an expression of awakening.
An expression of
rising consciousness,
changing consciousness.
A 7-day experience
of being mutually held
in a radically different
way of seeing the world.
The moment this
New Story Summit
was announced, within a
month it was sold out.
Please know that as we go
into this journey this week,
we are walking in a pre-prepared
field of potentially
transformational energy.
The original impulse
for the summit
was to see what
would happen if we
got a group of people
together who are all carrying
a thread of the new story.
Not try to reach
a single story,
but figure out what
are our common values?
What are the values we are going
to base all those stories on?
Love, and cooperation,
and friendly competition.
We are consciously stepping
out of our comfort zone.
And we do this through
creative being together,
through combining all
kinds of old and new wisdom
by combining the
youngest and the oldest.
This isn’t just an
excursion from reality, but
this is a glimpse of the future.
It is amazing that people from
forty-five different countries
have come to this event.
My name is Visolela
Namises. I am from Namibia.
[Introduction in own language]
My name’s Vicki Downey and I’m from
Tesugeh Oweengeh in New Mexico.
[Introduction in own language]
It’s really a privilege to
be here with you, particularly
to be the only
non-physical person
present, which I
suppose is fitting
given what I want to talk about.
I always come into these
events with a high amount
of expectation and
this has just blown me
away in terms of the
spaces that we’ve been in.
What flourished
here over the years
is what you see now, a
living, working community.
I want you to know
that this event is not
happening at a conference centre
where everything done for you
is done by paid employees.
The people who are harvesting
the food, the people who
are cooking in the kitchen,
the people who are cleaning up,
the office staff, everybody
here is part of this community.
We’re all drawn here by
this impulse to co-create,
to be of world service,
and to deeply listen.
Our inner attunement and
cooperation with nature
created an atmosphere,
a powerful note that
attracted many on inner levels.
We’re certainly not
perfect by any extent
of the imagination. All
the stuff that happens
in the world is happening here.
But why I like to
be here is that I
like what we do with that,
how we deal with all that.
We were asked to
have no publicity
and invite no one here, and
yet people kept arriving.
When I first arrived in
Findhorn 40 years ago,
I knew the community had a
gift to give the larger world
and that’s why I stayed.
40 years later, I still feel
that way, indeed even more so,
in part, at least,
because of this is event.
These kind of
gatherings give me
hope that there’s so much
energy and possibility,
to host our pain,
to host our joy,
and to bring all of those things
into a weaving that may really
serve us as a humanity
and serve this Earth.
I’ve seen people of many
nations grieving together.
And I’ve seen people of many
nations dancing together.
And I've seen indigenous
people from many nations
coming together and
taking us in a ceremony,
weaving so beautifully, no
ego, sharing feathers, fully
in service of our
grieving of our hearts.
Thank you for the simplicity.
Thank you for the co-creation.
Thank you for our co-creation.
May we continue.
The thing that has struck
me the most this week
is how wonderful and
wondrous this group of people
is and how magical this event is.
But not from a perspective
of us creating a meta
story for the world,
but from a perspective
of each one of us looking at
our own individual stories.
In personal transformation
we go through a period
where nothing works,
there’s nothing out there,
it’s a total void, we
don’t know where to go.
And now, this is happening at
a collective level in groups.
And we really don’t
have the skills yet
to learn how to
get through that.
But we learned a little
bit at this conference
because on Tuesday night
the whole group broke.
Everybody had different needs,
and wants, and all of this.
And there was an opposition
between the old story
and the new story,
which is going
to be the big
opposition in the world.
There it was, right
in front of us.
[Laughter]
I don’t know if any of you felt
like that in the last few days,
the seeds like—It might have been,
why are they stopping
that woman from speaking?
That is the essential
truth we all need to hear.
Or, simultaneously
in some other part
of the audience someone
saying, why have they
not stopped her yet?
Tick, tick, tick, tick,
tick, tick, talk everybody.
And meanwhile, somewhere
else, somebody is thinking,
I wonder what’s for lunch today.
We didn’t do a very good
job of getting through that.
So two nights, two days
later, what happens again?
Another eruption.
Because we have
a situation here.
We came in this
morning with a plan.
What a crazy idea.
We thought, we’ll
just kind of tweak
what we had yesterday
on the agenda,
and then we’ll know
where we’re going.
And then I walk in and go
ah—this is interesting.
This is a little different.
We don’t know.
I’m sitting here, as we say at
Findhorn, my heart is pounding.
I’m really angry that
something suddenly
seems to be taken over.
How many people don’t want to
go to workshops in the format
that we had yesterday?
Who does want to
go into open space?
You know, I’m just seeing,
like, this kind of habitual
internalised acquiescence to,
like, waiting for somebody else
to do it for us.
As Charles said, we don’t need
to wait for permission now.
But of course,
there’s a tendency
to wait for permission.
Anybody who wants to
right now can come down.
Either find the paper you had
yesterday, find a post-it,
write your name, claim a space.
I know it’s been rocky
at times, but I just
want to appreciate our
willingness to, kind of,
flow with what needs to happen.
I think we’ve got to a
reasonable place, a good place,
actually, where a lot
of needs are honoured.
So, I’m going to pass it
to you to close our space.
On the instrument,
unlike pianos and guitars,
all the notes are connected
by the skin of the shell.
So when one note is activated,
the whole shell is vibrating
and it’s connecting with
all the other notes.
And sometimes it
activates the other notes
so I thought it would be
a nice way to come back
into being together.
We didn’t
completely, completely
learn how to do that
in this one meeting.
But I think it’s a skill
set that now facilitators
will be aware—this is going
to happen in all our groups.
Because for real change,
not just small changes,
but major changes,
systemic changes
which are what we
need now—are going
to go through what all
transformations go through.
There’s going to be
chaos, opposition and anger,
but we get through.
And on the other side
is this tremendous joy
of creativity, experimentation.
It is such an exciting
period to be born into.
Never before has a mass
industrial civilization
run on the principles
of interconnectedness,
interbeingness, ecology,
the understanding
that we are all one,
that anything we do to
nature we do to ourselves.
That’s all new in our context.
And that’s really what the
new story is about, I think.
And everybody here is exploring
that in a different way.
The new story is going to
be a kaleidoscope of stories.
In every situation
turn pain to hope.
Intimate relationship
with the natural world.
Play—the joy of life.
Live my truth
inside and outside.
The magic that we
have with each other.
New way to do things,
to make things happen.
It’s a bit like jazz.
Recognise and
honour what is there.
It's a spiritual new story.
Every one of us can have
a personal and direct
relationship with the divine.
A new story about stories.
One mind, one heart.
An overriding principle
of first do no harm.
More for you is more for
me, that it’s all shared.
The new story is cow dung.
So many of us
and so many of you
have been working
on the new story
for an enormous amount of time.
That this new story, in
many ways, is not new.
In many ways it is going back
to ancient wisdom and stories
that were known
thousands of years ago.
I believe that
the Western world
is discovering its
role in the co-creation
of a new world on this planet.
We, the indigenous
people, already have it.
We didn’t choose to have
it, we have no choice.
It’s the role that has been left
for us to take on these times.
So our role is to
constantly be a reminder
that we can be one within this,
all the life on this planet.
The honour of having a
seat, having a place,
on that hoop of life, the hoop
of life being all life forms,
and all of us together
make up the hoop.
But we have to uphold it.
If anybody doesn’t uphold
their part of the hoop,
the hoop begins to fall, the
hoop’s integrity is lost.
And so right now I feel like
we’re falling down on that job.
We’re falling down on
the job of holding up
our part of the hoop.
Mother Earth can take
care of the balance
on this planet herself
and she doesn’t really
depend on humanity to do so.
But humanity does need to
harmonise with that transition,
or otherwise it can really
affect our civilizations
and the planet.
We’re, like, in this deep
process of rebirthing ourselves
from a history of colonization.
What did they see
when they came over
and they were looking at us?
What were we doing?
We were singing.
We were dancing.
We were pretending.
We were visioning.
We were seeing things
that they were not
seeing because they
had not developed
those ways of knowing.
And so to them, these are
the activities of children
and even their grown
men are participating
in these childish
activities, which
must make them a very
simple and primitive people.
And I think, it’s
not just about those
that were colonized.
It’s, I think, even more
important for the colonizer,
and those that came
with that history,
to acknowledge the pain in
that, and the hurt in that.
No excuses.
Just the pain and
the hurt in that.
Today still, over
6 million Congolese
have been murdered
in the last 17 years.
Hi, my name is Marie.
My heart is beating really fast.
And I am a woman, a young
woman, and I come from Belgium.
And I want to say sorry.
As my King was
Leopold the Second.
I want to say sorry for
my people to your people.
[Crying] I am sorry.
We are one.
And together
we can heal this.
Let's all hold the
space for a second,
and just notice the reconciliation
inside your heart.
When you’re in harmony,
then there is no fears,
there's no chaos,
there's no worries
about where we are going.
We’re more in harmony with every
transition that is necessary.
From the time we’re
children and all the way
up through our eldership,
we’re encouraging, we’re using,
we’re developing a very broad
spectrum of ways of knowing.
And that includes song,
that includes dance,
that includes creativity.
Dancing and singing for
somebody who is sick,
that is what is my
childhood memory.
When someone is ill,
mentally disturbed,
this person is not locked up.
I mean, this person
stays with the community.
And we organise a big ceremony
during which there are dances,
there is music, and we
believe each one of us
has a sort of sound code bar.
And when we reach
this sound code bar,
then the person will
just go into trance.
And this is really,
really helpful.
And it works.
And many people who go through
this ceremony usually recover.
Because they feel loved, taken
care of by the community,
and I think it’s a way
to support one another.
I think music is
also in our blood.
Rhythm, the same thing.
And I think life is about rhythm
and being in tune with nature.
We made our science
look beautiful.
We mean our science, you
know, weavings, paintings.
And so this is why it gets so
dismissed by Western science.
It’s because they
don’t understand
how to incorporate beauty
into functionality,
into some deep
scientific functionality.
But indigenous
cultures have known
how to put all those
things together.
I think they could see
energy in a way that we
can’t—that these rocks
that they've marked
were very significant.
There are a lot of
theories around this,
but nobody really knows.
It behoves you to
think of everything
in terms of life force.
Not merely an impersonal
force like electricity,
but the manifestation
of a being.
We are as much subtle beings
as we are physical ones.
We inhabit both
ecologies all the time,
though largely unconsciously
in one of them.
These subtle realms,
the energies around us,
are always informing us.
Indigenous people are used
to getting their medicines
from the forest, their
food from the forest,
and they know the forest
more than anybody else.
So to incorporate them in
actually protecting the forests
and being stewards of the
forests, as they’ve been,
and recognising that the people
that are harming the land
are not the indigenous people
that live with a very, very low
minimal effect or
footprint, I would say.
All this philosophy
of ecovillages
is the way we have been
living until very recently.
For thousands and
thousands of years,
these worked sustainably
because it had value.
And maybe my parents,
or my parents' parents
didn’t recognise that.
But now I recognise that
as I’m sitting here.
If you’re going to
live in one place
over an extended period of
time is speaking to a science.
And I believe their
science was thriving life.
And so this is why
I'm—you know,
I'm from an indigenous
people, but I wasn’t, I
didn’t start out my life being
raised from that perspective.
I started out my
life being raised
from an academic perspective,
from the church perspective,
and many of the
dominating forces
of this power over paradigm.
But I’ve made this
shift to go back and try
to understand where my
people are coming from,
what they were thinking
when they were having
this incredible thriving life.
Our culture is
still a matriarchy.
The last of the Polynesians
to be still a matriarchy.
Our mothers guide
us in our lives,
and our grandmothers
are the final word.
The eldest woman in a family
or a clan, or ohana, we say,
is the most precious thing.
Old women are the
flower that never fades.
They are the precious
flower, [Hawaiian].
The older they get, the
more beautiful they get.
Just to give you the
example of my grandmother,
she was a century
and seven years old.
And up to the last minute
she was there, fully present,
joking with us, telling
us stories, teaching us.
And today, unfortunately,
especially in the urban areas,
we have people—the grandmothers are
being replaced by
Facebook, by internet,
which is a sad prospect.
Today our leaders are
actually looking west.
They are emphasising an
education with technology,
and all that kind of thing.
They are talking about
building cities. In Kenya
they are thinking about
building a Las Vegas.
Like, this is not
the way forward.
It’s really the way backwards.
Because these systems in the
West are not working anymore.
But then, those are
the kinds of projects
that have got a lot of
money for corrupt leaders
to actually pocket
for themselves.
Not all our traditions
are also perfect.
I mean, we need to
review them and also
really take the best from it.
And also take the best from the
outside world and move forward.
To be a global family we
need more, not just love,
but we need more trust.
We need more confidence
in each other.
We need to count on each other.
In the indigenous peoples
and in the Western world.
We need to count
with each other,
to be there for each
other at any moment.
There’s a prophecy in our part
of the world in the Americas
that the eagle and the
condor will come together
and that they’ll learn how
to fly in the sky together.
And so this is a song about
that weaving of the Americas
back together into one cloth.
And it feels appropriate to
me at this gathering of our
weaving our cloths back
together as humanity.
So this is a travelling song.
♪ [Singing]
In Bhagavad Gita there are
three important words: yagna,
dhana, tapas.
So yagna is human
nature relationship.
How we live with nature,
because we are nature.
And then we have a second
word which is dhana.
So we not only replenish nature,
we also replenish human society
by giving.
Gift economy.
By sharing.
By receiving.
And by giving.
That’s a dhana.
And the tapas is
replenishment of the self.
So replenishment
of personal energy
through meditation, through
fasting, through solitude,
through caring for yourself.
We are caught in an
inescapable network
of mutuality tied into a
single garment of destiny.
Whatever affects one directly
affects all indirectly.
This is the way our
universe is structured.
We aren’t going to
have peace on Earth
until we recognise this basic
fact of the interrelated
structure of all reality.
So here’s Martin
Luther King who we
think of as an emblematic
icon of social justice,
civil rights, and human rights.
He’s speaking ecologically.
He’s speaking cosmologically.
He’s speaking in terms
of systems thinking.
As they say in
Africa, it’s ubuntu.
I’m only existing
because you’re existing.
Whatever happens to
you is happening to me.
Whatever is happening to the
rainforests is happening to us.
We’re not separate.
When I started in
professional conservation,
the target for
protected areas was 10%.
And if it goes below
a threshold size,
it can’t produce
the life support.
We have a challenge
with climate change.
We have a problem with our soils
now because of overcropping,
using chemicals.
The crucial thing for me
is that as part of that path
we in the West reduce our
impacts to our fair share
and in that journey
enjoy finding love.
The next terrain of slavery
will be in the domain of food.
Because if someone
else determines
what you’re going
to eat, how it is
going to be packaged
in terms of packaging
the seed itself and
the chemicals that
they’re going to put into it so
that it becomes a genetically
modified organism.
Then, people are in trouble.
It doesn’t matter where it
is grown, how it is grown,
as long as it is
packaged in plastic
and put on the
supermarket shelves
and bought as a commodity.
One of the things that I’m
involved with at the moment
is a group called
the Ecological Land
Cooperative which I chair now.
And the approach there is to
raise community finance to buy
land that's currently
in industrial farming
use to build
dwellings on that land
so that it can be
turned into small scale
agroecological growing.
Food is sacred. We have to
be connected with the food.
So we need to be
connected with soil.
We need to be connected with
animals that we take care of.
As if the seals are not
having an unjust experience.
You know, or the dogs
that we keep roped up.
You know what I mean?
We are all experiencing
the injustice.
It’s not just us.
It’s going on everywhere.
My life has become
dedicated to being
a voice for those who aren’t
ordinarily heard by humans.
Personally, I’ve
come to experience
that there is no
other way for people
to care than to have a direct
experience of connection,
or of being again related
with our more wild cousins.
Mostly, I work with humans to
help them reconnect with nature
in a very direct
experiential way,
once again lending an
ear to what is being said
and what’s being reflected to
us by all those other beings
with whom we share the planet.
I wish to bring my voice in
service to frog, and whale,
and wind, and thunder,
and hurricane, and soil,
and coyote.
Not because of their utility
to me as a human being,
but because they are other
nations, other tribes.
This area that
was once a forest
vibrant with wide life,
animals, hippos, crocodiles,
different sorts of
birds, and everything
because it was a thick umbrella.
This forest go into a
complete lunar desert
because, sorry to say that, of
stupid agricultural policies.
I went to a friend’s farm.
She’s got, like,
500 acres of where
they grow organic food
and the soil is depleted.
There’s nothing in it anymore.
The good story is there’s a
village not far from ours which
is called Ijara and
then these people
have reforested millions
of trees around.
So, with two other partners
bought farmland in Oregon
on the convergence
of two rivers.
And then we were just
like learning how
the land dictates what you do.
The fullness of knowing where
the food comes from that’s
on the table, learning how to
empty my own compost toilet,
and to see the beauty of
that, the beauty of that waste
is compost for life.
You have to listen
and, you know,
what happens when you nourish
the soil, and what comes out.
Just, like, the magic of
farming is mind blowing.
So we bought it and basically
gave it to the community
and gave the
opportunity for anyone
who wanted to use it
for something beautiful,
that they could just come
live and create beauty.
The food should be local.
We should participate
in growing the food.
Food should be
organic rather than
these chemical fertilizers,
pesticide, herbicide.
We are looking at how we can
reclaim our traditional seeds,
also.
Have seed banks.
Start growing
permaculturally, which
is how people used to grow,
traditionally, really.
Although now it has
been packaged again.
It’s called permaculture and
it’s being brought back to us.
But that’s how I remember
we used to grow things
with my grandmother.
And this place where we used
to go with my grandmother
used to be called Tiriji.
So I have named my Eco Center
Tiriji, a place of remembering.
I mean, we can solve CO2.
It’s not hard.
But that’s not the
end of the story.
The next crisis will go deeper.
And eventually it will
bring us to a relationship
with nature that is of
mutual honour and respect.
You can call the inner world,
the subtle beings, anything
you want.
It doesn’t make any
difference to me.
But they constitute part
of the greater nature.
And it was just—has been
part of my strong commitment
that by bringing
these other allies in
you could create a
force that we will need.
And then, in fact,
we do need it.
We’re not going to get out
of this environmental mess
by science and policy alone.
It’s very important to start
looking at beyond rationality
to our inner lives.
And this is something
that’s just happening now,
and I hope it hastens up and
it gets faster and faster.
Because we have so much
guidance from an in that
most people do not know about.
And it’s so important.
As a person who's
been communicating
with the subtle worlds
for nearly 70 years,
I naturally see
this collaboration
with non-physical beings
as an integral part
of any planetary story.
Demonstrating the
reality of this
was one of Findhorn’s
original purposes.
At first I didn’t
trust what I received,
and I had to learn
to discriminate
between my normal thoughts and
those coming from my God self.
Eventually I chose
a vegetable that I
liked eating, the garden pea.
I made contact with
my inner divinity
and then focused on the pea.
To my surprise, I
made an immediate link
and received a creative,
helpful response.
Other devas had
an input to offer.
This is an example
from the lily deva.
We feel it’s high
time for you humans
to branch out and
include in your horizons
the different forms of life
which are part of your world.
You have been forcing your
own creations of vibrations
on the world, ones which
are more than strange
and not at all pleasant
to us and to others.
Without taking
into consideration
that all living things are
part of the whole as you were,
put there by divine
plan and purpose.
Just as each soul has
its own contribution
to make to the whole, so has
each plant, each mineral.
No longer should you consider
us as lower forms of life
with no intelligence with
which to communicate.
We got many answers
from the devas
to our gardening
questions, but they never
ordered us to do anything.
The angels, the devas,
or God, whatever word
we are comfortable
using, do not want
us to be obedient servants.
But they want a humanity
attuned to its own wholeness,
and who can cooperate
with them as equals.
Very close to my home we
have the Los Alamos National
Laboratories where the first
atom bomb was dreamed up.
And we had terrible
forest fires.
And the forest fires were coming
very close to this laboratory.
And wanted to get me and my
children out of harm’s way.
What should I do?
I was asking spirit.
And spirit said something
to me. Spirit said,
what do you people want?
What do you people want?
You can have it any
way you want it.
And right now everything you’re
thinking, speaking, feeling,
acting says that you want
to be in the position
where you have 30,000 barrels
of radioactive liquid waste
sitting on a dock with a
forest fire raging up to it.
But if you want something
else, that can be arranged.
Some time ago I
met Fran Stephan
who was a research scientist
for the Environmental Protection
Agency of the US.
And she came to me and
thanked me for my work.
And I thought, what?
The Environmental
Protection Agency?
The story was that she
had been given a job
to find how polluted Puget Sound
is—that’s a body of water
near where I live—and she
kept on for three, four days
and got no indicator species.
And yet she was killing life
all the time getting nowhere,
not even being able to start.
And she was heartsick.
She didn’t want that to happen.
She didn’t know what to do.
So she gave up her own
knowing when she said,
I just need help.
I give up.
And then she heard of
some peculiar place
that said nature
had an intelligence
and that you could ask.
So she, on her last day, she
sat down first and said,
I want to know specifically what
these indicator species are.
So they put down
the net as usual
and it didn’t seem
to fill up at all.
But gradually, they got tired
of it so they pulled it up
and it seemed empty.
And then she looked
at it, in the corner
was nothing but those indicator
species that she’d asked about.
Nothing else.
Well, she didn’t believe it.
It was a miracle.
But they did it again and
the same thing happened,
and she was able to
finish her research.
And to me it’s an idea that the
scientific people of our world
have to be open to ask.
Because many of these
things will be in terms
that I couldn’t put
in because I wouldn’t
have a scientific mind.
But we can get precise
answers from the intelligence
of nature.
In this view the
Earth is itself
a great ecosystem with
two interconnected
and interdependent ecologies,
one of which is material,
and one of which is not.
In fact, I often refer
to the subtle worlds
as Earth’s second ecology.
Before entering
the forest, I feel
I have to ask the
permission of the forest.
Like, dear the
forest, I am a human.
I belong to a species, a
species that is violent,
that is destructive.
And I am not sure if
I deserve to enter
your beautiful territory.
I ask your permission.
And, of course, I receive
very warm welcoming.
For me spending time in
nature is hugely important,
whether that’s swimming in open
water, hiking in mountains,
climbing on snow and ice,
or being in a desert.
There’s something about the
wild places which I find hugely
energising and nurturing.
One of the most
powerful activities
we did with the
teachers was to take
them snorkelling and swimming.
And when they went
underwater, they
were blown away
by what they saw.
They were like, we
didn’t realise there
was so much life underwater.
And so much trash.
And from there, they started
incorporating marine education
in their curriculum.
Saying we must value forests
now because if we don’t we’re
not going to have a
planet to live on,
that’s still saying the value
of nature is for its service
to us.
But what about valuing a forest
on its own terms, because it’s
sacred.
I am an advocate for Earth law.
In particular, one Earth
law that I’m working on
is ecocide law to criminalise
mass damage and destruction
to the Earth.
And to create a
legal duty of care.
And this is about recognising
and upholding the Earth’s right
to life.
And when I say Earth, I
mean all living beings,
human and non-human beings.
I proposed that law into the
United Nations back in 2010
and my life really
did change overnight.
It takes courage to stand
up and speak out and say,
I support ecocide law.
And this is about calling in
support, the support of law
to help those indigenous
communities, those communities
that are most adversely
impacted whether or not
it’s human caused ecocide
through largely corporate
damage and destruction.
Or whether or not it’s naturally
occurring ecocide, rising sea
levels, tsunamis.
The kind of work I’m doing, and
that my colleagues are doing,
requires that people actually go
inside and take responsibility.
It’s not about you, you, you,
you, you, I’m blaming you.
It’s about what have I done?
What can I take
responsibility for?
How can I come to the table as
a person who is impacted by this
and help come up
with a resolution?
This law for the
rights of nature
was actually brought in in Mexico.
They even had, they had
indigenous ceremonies
and they also had a
Tibetan Lama present,
you know, with the town
council, and everybody
sitting in meditation together.
We can choose to regenerate
life wherever we are.
To regenerate ecosystems.
To heal the waters.
To heal the Earth.
To heal the air.
And to heal the plants
and the animals around us.
To heal ourselves.
We have that power
as human beings.
This new story can happen
only if we transform education.
I see the new story
happening in education
where young people are
self-directing themselves
and their own learning,
and they’re actually
realising I don’t need to
go sit in that classroom,
and in that box.
I can take my education and
my learning into my own hands.
So if a teacher, although they have
a lot of knowledge and wisdom
stored up, and information,
if they could approach
a pupil from a tone of
mutual respect, like,
we have lots to learn
from each other.
I will treat you as my equal
throughout this education
process.
And to go off and
support them to do
whatever they want to
do, to give them guidance
if they need it.
To, basically, say if you’re
interested in a topic,
you go off, research it,
discuss it with your peers,
come to a conclusion instead
of giving them the information
and saying, I’m establishing myself
as the superior position,
I have the information and
you learn from me.
Because that’s my
experience of education.
They expect you to
absorb information,
and regurgitate it, and not
take it to another level,
especially, that’s
the basic standard.
And so we need to get
that from each other.
And we need to create these
peer-to-peer networks where
we can learn from each other.
It’s really the
only way that we’re
going to get this very
personal and deep experience
from each person.
Link up schools,
so that my children
in the UK are able to,
through video, and
through the screens,
are able to have a shared lesson
with your children in Brazil.
And they can experience
different worlds.
And they grow up with
that global mindset.
Modern old story education is
de-skilling our young people.
I want new story
education to be skilling
human beings, and young people,
so that they can build a house,
they can grow food.
These are basic needs
of human beings.
Technology and all other
things are icing on the cake.
The real cake is we need food,
we get clothes, we need a house,
and we need to grow good,
organic, wholesome food.
I want to see a new
story education which
is not only about head, not only
about intellectual knowledge,
not only about
measurement, not only
about academic
achievement. It is also
about heart, feelings, emotions,
relationship, love, compassion,
generosity, beauty.
All these values
come from the heart.
It’s just one of
those things it’s
like, we’ve all been on various
experiences kind of like this
but completely
different, obviously.
But this is the first
one that we’ve properly
been on that it’s not
been adults observing.
It’s the raw emotions
there as well.
It’s not the
detachedness of, we’re
going to watch, and find out
what happens with you guys,
we’ve been there, we’ve
done that, it’s fine.
This is a first.
This is a new thing.
And all the emotions
are raw from everybody,
it’s not just us.
And it means a
lot to us for that
and we just want
to say thank you.
I have this idea that keeps
coming round in my head of the fact
that there’s so much knowledge
and wisdom in the, sort of,
elders, and the educators,
and the trainers,
and the mentors in
this whole movement.
And there’s so much
energy in, sort of,
imagination in the young people.
That I’ve, sort
of, got this thing.
I’m like, if we
could just find a way
to really bring
them together, then
it’s like, anything is possible.
And I think today’s
young people are thirsty.
Today’s young people
are starving for elders.
We’re not looking for parents,
we’re looking for grandparents.
We are culturally so starved
of initiation and ceremony
in general, we don’t even really
know what it is, many of us.
My inspiration to help
out the next generation
has been from the profound
wisdom of indigenous cultures
and how they’ve
raised their children.
The environment of
living close to the Earth
has really orchestrated
a seamless and complex
cultural basket for
children to grow up in.
Without adolescent initiation
into responsibility
of what it means to be an
adult, to locate and orient
their values from
the inside out,
we’re going to keep
getting a world driven
by consumption and lack
of long term thinking
for the future generations.
And when we look at adults today
who have not been initiated
into a culture, those adults
can wreak some serious havoc
in the world when
they’re given power,
and we call that
uninitiated behaviour.
The initiatory
experience is a guided
experience by the
community and the elders
to assist that young person
so that they can then,
in a healthy way, take their
place in the mosaic that
is the community.
I was 17 years old, I
left Spain and I landed
in this Findhorn community.
And I found elders around me
that saw something more than
what I thought I should be.
And they fostered
that, so I was lucky.
We’re living in a
culture where we’re
coming of age in a
society where our parents
and our grandparents
haven’t been initiated.
From elder women, they can
learn how to serve, you know.
How to be there for women.
What it is that women want.
But from elder men, I think they
learn to forgive themselves.
Most men I know don’t
actually like women.
They are afraid of
women, actually.
And they disguise
this fear in the way
that men have been
disguising their fear
since the dawn of time.
They puff up their chest like
monkeys and do ooh, ooh, ooh,
ooh, ooh, ooh, get as big as they
can hoping that the woman will
be afraid and run away.
They principally drive
the women in their lives
off and spend the rest of their
waking hours regretting it.
And they all struggle with
both their sexual drives,
and their need to be
mothered, and their need
to present themselves as
if they have no such need.
And it’s this paradoxical
conflict, an inability in them
to see themselves clearly.
And when they cannot
clearly see themselves,
they don’t really
know who to forgive.
See even our brother
raven is accenting
that remark by saying,
yeah, you tell him,
that’s what’s going on.
Indigenous culture
often has the rites
of passage for the young woman.
As soon as she has
her first moon time
she becomes life
bringer, life bearer.
So you are a beautiful
girl who has just
come out of the waters,
come out of this hut,
so you need to show yourself.
♪ [Chanting]
So if you had been instructed
from the very first time
you got your moon
what your capacity
was, what you were able to
do in this life as woman.
It is the power of woman
when she is on her moon time.
That’s where she’s powerful.
I think so.
We need to really make it
a point to appreciate that.
Being heard, being
felt, being seen by men
as your genuine
self, as a woman.
From the very beginning to
be allowed to live in unison,
in one with her blood.
Recognising it, respecting
it, and allowing
it to flow into mother Earth
and again gaining new strength.
Women have been
turned into a material
possession for consumerism,
for consumption, for sales.
Women in my country,
they are so, so oppressed.
The women have a
right to be angry.
They have a right to lash
out at the inequality.
But a smart woman
would rather find a way
to heal the inequality
than to swing the pendulum
in the other direction.
I wanted to help women
to be part of solution.
Not victim.
Not problem.
But to be a part of solution.
We’ve swung one way really
hard in the last few millennia,
you know, where the
masculine is dominating,
the patriarchy, they say.
I just feel inside me
and pray for this pattern
to be released of the
macho, dominating, sexually
abusing pattern that
us western males carry.
A woman in her power,
in her genuineness,
then there’s nothing
sexier than that.
And there’s nothing more
appealing than that.
A Sri Yantra reminding
me, someone beautifully
said, that the initial shift
into the current civilization
really happened
because of a rift
between the male and female.
And that’s what this
symbol represents.
I think that both men and
women have a responsibility
to embody both.
The journey for me is
to keep these two parts
in communication in my heart.
The Manish of now knows
there is a man and woman
inside of him.
I feel I am a man as
much as I am a woman.
There is no separation.
There is nothing more
sacred than that union
between men and women.
The stars have spent
lifetimes trying
to reach us with the
message that our light can
inspire solar systems
if we let it shine.
Like the moon’s reflection
of her sons and daughters,
great, great
grandfathers and mothers
foretold this time of great
blessing and slaughter
where we decide between
drought and drowning in water,
or rising like mist from
rivers toxic with dreams.
And give birth to rainwater
and fall pure to the Earth.
I think that we’re
in a time now,
the very exciting
time, of creating
a new story and a new culture.
And I think it’s
something that’s
happening on a global scale.
It’s the movement
from the 'I' to the 'We'.
Both are necessary, but
where the learning edge is
is around with
collective groups.
I think that
community is powerful
when there is a common
vision, and also
when we stay in the
difficult moments
together and transform them.
Somehow we have ended
up in a place where
we are so afraid of
each other and we
have to so deeply recondition
ourselves to trust each other.
And communities are the
greenhouses for this trust.
It’s intimacy.
It’s where life comes from.
And it’s not comfortable,
it’s powerful.
Many times we talk
about our culture
as being based on a
story of separation,
and community is
a remedy for that.
It is a remedy for
the global disease
of loneliness and separation.
A person is another
person’s medicine.
I can say one word is
family, community is family.
One of the biggest reasons
I want to live in community
is for my kids.
I think these community
spaces are really
rich, fertile grounds
for kids to grow up in.
Ecovillages have been very
sustainable in the times
of economic depression,
just because the hunger
for community just
becomes bigger.
Within the Global
Ecovillages Network
then, there is this thinking,
within Africa, within the world
also, about how villages
that exist right now
can actually transition
into ecovillages.
The previous
government, you know,
decided to turn every other
village into an ecovillage.
So that’s a total of
14,000 ecovillages.
We had a president that
had really big dreams
for Senegal and for Africa.
We owe it to the majority
world to get out of fossil fuels
faster.
Now that requires some
sort of evidence based
rapid decarbonisation plans.
And it is entirely possible.
It’s just a question of
having the political will,
and the financial
decisions, and the context,
the regulatory context.
We can power down energy
demand by 60% over two decades
because, firstly, we’re
at an extreme point
of using far more
energy than we actually
need for our well-being.
Carbon neutrality is the
only possible way to go,
and it’s not my
personal opinion.
It is what the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change
tells us, that we have to get
to global carbon neutrality
by the second half
of the century.
The solution isn’t
that someday everybody
is going to move out of
their city to an ecovillage,
you know.
But the idea is
that someday what
has been developed
in the ecovillages
will be translated
into everywhere.
What I see us doing, what I
see Transition Towns doing,
is creating a new
cultural story.
And creating it by building it.
You know, I certainly don’t
want to put down ecovillages
because they have their
place, and they’re
fantastic examples of
where we might be going,
and where we might get to.
They’re really inspirational.
But to bring those
ecological concepts,
ecological and
social technology,
into where most people are
living at this time, I feel,
is a really crucial piece
of what needs to be done.
And that’s what we’re doing.
That’s what
Transition Towns does.
It says to people, you don’t
have to go away to an ashram
somewhere.
You don’t have to go
away to an ecovillage.
You can just start where you are
now with the people you know,
and start to create
the world you want.
It’s also really important
to have a model for how do we
collectively discuss issues?
What feels fair?
Do we want somebody
to be in control?
Do we not?
What kind of leadership can
facilitate radical change?
How do you change
complicated structures?
That requires leadership.
It requires managers
who are clever,
not just from an
intellectual point of view,
but from an emotional
point of view.
In the business
work I do, we’re
working with intensely
top down structures.
And then I come
to Findhorn which
is a deep democracy,
bottom up structure.
And it’s much easier to get
something done in a corporation
than it is in a community.
Leadership I think, in the next
phases of humanity, leadership
is actually coming from a
collective perspective and not
an individual perspective.
That’s where my
leadership rises from,
out of listening
to what’s happening
in the place, in the people,
in the moment, in the field.
And if my leadership I
really feel will serve,
I will step forward.
But if someone else steps
forward and gets moving,
I celebrate that.
It’s rather like geese flying.
You know, it’s so much
easier when you fly together
and then you can step back.
So there’s no one overall
leadership, in fact,
it’s a shared space.
You step forward when the
time is right, you step back
and you support the others
who then take the lead.
I bumped into an
individual who works
for one of the
largest headhunting
companies, the recruitment
companies, in New York.
So these are the
people who are placing
the directors and
the chief executives
into the big companies.
And I’m on the 25th story
of a tower block in New York
and I’m talking about what
I believe is the edge in
leadership development.
I’m talking about how it’s
about personal development,
and he acknowledges me.
And I’m saying it’s about shadow
work, and he acknowledges me.
And I say it’s about
organisational shadows that
are causing damage to the
world, and he nods even more.
And I’m at the point where
I kind of feel a tension.
And it’s about spirituality,
and he says, absolutely.
But I think there is a style of
collective leadership right now
that is still coming from this.
There is not yet enough
of this integrated in us.
So the style that we see is
still about winning and losing.
It is not about
a third position.
It is not about finding, holding
enough the tensions that we
can find the third position.
I think the female style has the
ability to birth the tensions.
And through the tensions, a
third position comes through.
The first thing
that has to happen
is that I have to be
aligned to a purpose that’s
greater than my own
ego, and aligned
to a purpose that’s greater
than the ego of the company.
Not to seek success,
financial success, or name,
or fame, or prestige.
Where I have the confidence to
lead into a period of decline,
and to actually take something
into a cycle of death.
Because by doing that what
I do, whether it’s me,
or whether it’s my company,
that’s another question,
I create a space into
which innovation can come.
And I effectively speed up
the process of evolution.
To seek fulfillment.
Fulfillment of its members.
Fulfillment of the
local community.
need of the land.
That is the intention.
The purpose of
our gathering.... this
is actually a gathering of
the secret world government.
There’s a new story for
politics in our time.
It’s not an either/or politics,
it’s a both/and politics.
It’s a politics of deeply
listening, and collaborating,
and working together on
behalf of the common good.
Where we, the people,
are saying, you know what?
What do we need
to do differently
with how we are governing
what we care about?
Lady Rothschild and
the City of London
just sponsored a conference on
inclusive capitalism in London.
This is a primal scream.
Translated, it means
stop the pitchforks.
That’s another big
challenge that we face,
is when an organisation,
or the power
that can be accumulated
around an organisation,
and there the power is
defined as money—when
that kind of economic
power is in bed
with the political power, then
what happens to the governing?
On the West Coast
the billionaires
in Seattle and Portland,
they’re talking about something
called redemptive capitalism.
This is a primal scream
for stop the pitchforks.
What power is is that
you have a lot of force
at your disposal.
You have a lot of
money, you have a lot
of whatever kind of force.
But these people have no power.
And I realised this again
when I was in South Africa
just a couple weeks ago
speaking to some MPs there,
some Members of Parliament.
And I was just struck. Privately
they agreed with everything
I said, but they felt
helpless to do anything
with this knowledge.
Because their job
description didn’t
allow for that kind of
thing without some kind
of extraordinary leap of courage.
What’s missing from
the collective dialogue
is the citizen’s
craft of intelligence.
Intelligence is about
decision support.
It is not about
spying and secrecy.
My national
interest, my security.
It's like a human being,
we have personal interest.
Nations develop this idea
of our national interest,
and national security,
and therefore we
go to war for national
security and national interest.
There are no national interests.
There are only
interests of the Earth.
Interests of whole of humanity.
We’re totally,
totally disorganised.
There are eight
tribes of information.
Academic.
Civil society, including
labour and religion.
Commerce, especially
small business.
Government, especially local.
Law enforcement.
Media.
Military.
And non-government non-profits.
All of them stink at the
craft of intelligence.
They also don’t
talk to each other.
They don’t talk
across the borders,
they don’t talk
between organisations,
they don’t talk among
individuals within
organisations, so one of the
things we have to do is create
a world brain, as it were.
But it has to be a deliberative
dialogue world brain.
I would like to see
all national governments
be on a pilgrimage.
And we are on a pilgrimage
in the service of humanity,
in the service of the Earth.
And through service to humanity
and service to the Earth,
we have self-realisation.
The key is not money.
Economy is almost the
antithesis of the sacred.
Both because of what it’s
doing to the planet and people,
and also because it’s kind
of this realm of calculation,
and utility, and selfishness.
No company exists
without customers.
So we can blame companies
for changing our diet,
and making us unhealthy,
and driving up
obesity and heart disease.
But, there’s customers
that choose to buy.
Those institutions,
the corporations,
are totally human creations.
Money is totally
a human creation.
I mean, this is the
thing about money,
it has absolutely no existence
outside of the human mind.
There are far more
senior people on boards
searching for purpose.
We need to organise starting
that life is the defining
value.
And we need to align power
with that value, which
means aligning power
with living beings
and living communities
that are everywhere local.
There are people like
you and I who care.
And they have employees who
look at these things and say,
this is not the world that we
want to help shape and create.
I’m not suggesting
they’re all like that,
but there’s certainly
a growing number
who are thinking
in a different way.
What we need to do is learn
to meet our own needs locally,
balance co-productive
relationship
with our local environment.
And that begins to look
like what you guys are doing
in Findhorn with
your ecovillage,
using your own resources,
organising community, working
in co-productive partnership
with nature to meet your needs.
Now, you don’t
meet all your needs
so you exchange
with your neighbours
in a balanced, fair exchange.
And that ripples
out, ultimately,
into an interconnected
global economy.
But one that is
rooted in community
and organised around
life, rather than one that
is organised as a
rapacious system
responsive, predominantly,
to global financial markets.
I think we’re going to move
to somewhere where there
is some kind of
balance where there’s
going to be, say, a yang
based currency system that is
about exchange and competition.
But there’s also going
to be a yin based system
that is more about
cooperation and how
we can give to each other.
You get those
foundational ideas and then
the whole frame shifts.
So, through these three
technologies, the crowd
funding, the crowd speaking,
and the crowd sourcing,
we’re able to build abundance
in our lives in a way
that we haven’t
been able to before.
You know, my good
friend Thom Hartmann
talks about walking
away from the King.
The King is the
all powerful ruler,
controller of life and death.
But if all the people walk
away and say, you know,
we’re not interested
in your game.
It’s not working for us.
The King is
absolutely powerless.
So, whatever way we choose
to transport ourselves,
to feed ourselves,
to dress ourselves,
all those have to be understood
as voting with your wallet.
We haven’t invested in finding
our shared framing story
that connects all the dots.
The key, to me, is living Earth.
Earth as a living being.
That’s the foundation.
Sacredness has to infuse
all aspects of our lives,
including the aspect of
giving and receiving,
which is really what
economy is about.
It’s about how we coordinate
our joint creativity
and how we take
care of each other.
What could be more
sacred than that?
We started a Gift
Culture University, also.
Maybe the first one in
the world like that.
It’s called Swaraj University.
We have over 250 faculty mentors
who work all in gift culture
with the University.
I have this habit too,
jumping to, okay, well where’s
the money going to come from?
As if that were
the thing that will
make it possible or impossible.
When the Foundation decided to
make the summit gift economy,
there were people who
just said, oh, you
are really stupid to do that.
That will never work.
People will just
see it as a freebie.
They will exploit this
generosity of spirit.
They’ll just come.
Nobody will give about the
50 pound commitment fee
and you will lose
money big time.
This is just too
huge a risk to take.
You would be really
stupid to do that.
And we did it anyway,
which was really nice.
But usually I find
that that money issue
is a way to kind of
validate disempowerment
that’s coming from
somewhere else.
And that when you take
that first step then
the money appears.
We did tell people what the
base cost rate for us to have
people here for a week was, and
interestingly, 77% of people
gave below that base rate.
But the wonderful thing
is that 8% of the people
gave 50% of our income, so
they more than covered it.
So when you offer something
sacred, what’s the right price?
Any price is too much.
Because you don’t want
money to be a limitation.
You want to give it.
And of course, the gem in
that is that we would never
have had such a diverse
mixture of the human family
here had it not
been gift economy.
The young people
could never have
paid even the base cost rate.
At the same time, any
price is too little.
Because how do you reduce the
sacred to a finite number?
So, one solution to
this is to give it away.
Not to say that it’s
free, but it’s my gift.
For us, choosing
the gift economy
was just a brave experiment
to try a different model.
And when it’s all
finished and we
know what our income and
expenditures in all this was,
I’m going to post this
online so that you can all
learn from the experiment
and see how it turned out.
I mean financially, which
is what a lot of people
are very interested in, we had a
net abundance of £25,000,
which was fantastic.
I do believe if we can change
the story, that’s the key.
Then everything else follows,
and can follow, very rapidly.
And it was interesting because
one of the gift philanthropists
said to me, I really want to
take part in this experiment
because I want to see where
human consciousness is.
Are we ready for gift economy?
I would like to start with a
moment of silence because what
I’m going to talk about is a
little bit different territory
because we are going to
look inside ourselves.
So maybe if you could
just sit comfortably
and connecting with ourselves
and feeling relaxed.
There is amazing grace
in each one of us.
There is Buddha Nature, which
means the potential to become
an enlightened being.
In the most humble sense,
it’s within us, right.
The seeds are within us already.
When I go and meditate,
I’m still with myself.
That’s essential, that, sort
of, listening and receiving.
For something new to emerge
we need to make space.
There is an enormous
potential in the inner path,
in looking inwards
and finding what’s
going on inside your
body and inside your mind
and connecting with your spirit.
It’s not just solutions out
there, it’s solutions in here.
We have to transform our
inner worlds so that we
are at peace with ourselves.
As we set ourselves free,
we inspire those around us
to be free.
We know this, Mandela
said it, many people
have said it in a million
different languages.
Rumi has said it, like, 15,000
years ago it has been said,
these things have been said.
The first step is
that self mastery
and that awareness of self.
Whatever it is that you’re
creating in the world
is going to be coming from a
certain craving, or desire,
or frustration, or gung ho-ness
that can ultimately be a little
bit damaging in creating
something that’s very grounded,
and balanced, and heart
centered, and expansive.
It takes patience.
It takes self awareness.
As much as I can,
possibly in every moment,
be present with what is
happening in front of me,
behind me, inside
me, outside me.
To have the courage to
sit in those places that
feel uncomfortable
and not immediately
judge those moments.
And to feel uncomfortable,
it’s a good thing.
It’s a good thing to be
able to hold that space.
I’m actually challenging myself
to step out of my comfort zone.
Because when I do that, that’s
really where the magic happens.
There’s a meaning
to this madness.
There’s a method
My identity has been
something that I’ve had
to figure out as I move along.
What happened for
me was everything
started to break down
in my own belief system.
So once I started to really
question the belief system
that I’d been given.
I was very lost as a person.
I didn’t really know who I was.
And I went through a
journey of addictions,
and the psychiatric system.
And so I had this experience
of, just, a desolation
of everything that I knew.
So that fear of the wild,
and the uncontrolled,
and the unpredictable suddenly
became my landscape of,
like, I don’t
understand anything.
I don’t know where anything
is and what anything means.
My name is Jonathan
Standing Bear.
I feel the grief.
I will not turn away
from this grief.
I will welcome this grief.
Tears will often flow, or
they will be there to flow.
And rather than
allowing that happen,
we’ll be like, oh
forgive me for crying,
or we’ll try to damn
them up when exactly
that’s what’s called for.
And it was a
terrifying experience.
But so wonderful as a, kind
of, training of what it’s like
to be in the unknown, which
is, of course, what life is.
♪ She has
green dragon eyes.
She
can see right to
the heart of things.
And her body moves with
surprise as though every moment
were the only one.
And she’s thirsty for life.
She knows how to say
no and when to say yes.
And she’ll give you—
Where you think
you’re superior,
or you think you’re inferior.
Where you play a game of being
a victim, or being a rescuer,
or being a persecutor,
pointing at others.
No, just stopping that
game and realising
that I’m here because I
was created out of love.
And I’m here to bring that
love again into the world.
♪ She knows that she’ll
learn straight from the dragon.
♪ She knows that deep in the
cave of her motherland.
♪ She knows that no saint with
no sword came to destroy them.
♪ She knows and she learned
straight from the dragon.
All the anger I felt
and all the hopelessness
and desperation was not about
others making it better for me,
but it was about me
healing and finding
my sense of inner power, and my
sense of empowerment within me.
That pain is always going
to block us from believing.
And that’s why the pain has to
be cleared, it has to be faced.
And that’s another reason
why grief is so important.
I try not to fight against
the waves of feeling sometimes
a little bit down,
and introverted,
and maybe even a
little bit depressed.
I just embrace those
feelings, as well,
and be aware of what
they want to tell me.
And out of the doubt
I can create again,
I can re-decide again
who I am right now
and what my purpose is.
It was a very
powerful moment for me
to say enough, no more,
that’s no longer my story.
I choose a very
different story indeed.
And I choose a story that
goes back to my childhood
where I really was happy.
And I choose to seed that energy
instead into what I’m doing.
Everyone has a gift
to give to the world,
but we have to remember
that transformation process,
it’s so wounding.
And yet, what it brings, the
prize for going through that,
I can’t even speak
about the difference
that happens in one’s life.
♪ She has
green dragon eyes.
♪ She can see through the lies.
♪ She has green dragon eyes.
♪ [Chanting]
We need to build a movement
that connects ecology,
social justice, and cosmology
using the power of dream,
the power of story, the power
of art, and the power of action.
People are always talking about
how do we create a movement?
How do we turn our organisation....
How do we transition it from an
organisation to a movement?
This is not something
that one can do.
It’s not something
that one creates.
A movement creates us.
It’s something
that we can serve.
But you can’t make one up.
If you try, you get
a fake movement.
A movement is a movement.
It’s something that
moves on its own, and moves us.
What if I had
nothing to tell you
and we just stood here
for those seven minutes
and just be present to
ourselves and to each other.
We’re facing a
challenge that we
have no idea how to deal with.
Even if you say, oh,
well, the technologies
for living sustainably on
Earth are already here.
All we have to do—well, who is this we?
We need the perspectives
of different cultures
in order to weave the story
for humanity of the future.
We are oneness and yet we
speak different languages,
we see different worlds.
Our role then becomes
a role of service,
serving that which
wants to happen,
that which wants to be born.
So what I always say to
the young people is this,
I want you to want your life.
You know, it’s not that
you have to, kind of,
force this thing to happen.
It wants to happen.
And what I say to
the elders around them
is I say, how can we ask
them to want their life when
you don’t want your life?
One day when they said
to me, our husbands have
died, how can you help us?
I said I don’t know
how to help people.
Tell me how you want
to help yourselves.
And your role is quite
like a baby being born.
The mother does
most of the work.
The baby does some through its
struggles, and moving around,
but the mother does
most of the work.
The situations that
we perceive as problems
are actually an opportunity that
we have been given to remember.
So to the elders in this room
today I want to say to you,
I want you to want your life.
You gotta want your life.
We have to believe in the
power of our deepest impulses
and inclinations.
We have to follow the
instincts of our heart.
It could be something
that’s tiny, seemingly.
That’s invisible.
That you could never
say, you could never
rationally explain how this
is going to change the world.
And the things we can do now
might not be exactly right.
They might not be able to get us
to where we really need to go,
but they might be
a stepping stone.
They might get us
part of the way.
We created the
rubbish exhibition.
So each group
creating the rubbish
so it will be like
an exhibition that
will be displayed in
different parts of their town
to remind people you have
to be aware of the rubbish.
In April we purchased
a piece of land
where we’ll be building
a cultural immersion
and sustainability
education centre.
Make cow dung soap.
And we share that
with young people
and see how much
wisdom—all of our food
systems, our architectural
structures, our healing
systems, our souls, we’re
connected to cows and cow dung.
So we make this cow dung soap
which has cow dung in it,
it has a special clay in it,
it has neem, it has aloe vera,
and it’s a fantastic,
fantastic alternative.
It’s vital that people
follow their creativity,
that they follow their heart.
Our focus is women
living with HIV and AIDS
and children who have lost
their parents to HIV and AIDS.
The pain, the
grief that we feel
is what’s going to fuel the
passion that it’s going to take
to create a better world.
It’s called Peace Research
Village Middle East
and me myself with other Israeli
peace activists are the vision
holders for this vision.
And on the streets of Hong Kong
today students and activists
are not stepping down,
they’re stepping up
and taking on China, the
rising giant of our planet.
They act in Israel and
we act in Palestine,
but we are connected
in that vision level.
We came up with the idea of
developing storage cookers
where a big mass, thermal
mass, of riverbed stone
could be heated up
during the night.
And then when people wanted
to boil water in the morning,
a small fan was
blowing air through it.
So you could capture
that heat at night,
store it and use
it during the day
when the hydro wasn’t
available because it
was powering the lights
in all the buildings.
Those sorts of little
twists of technology.
Low tech, appropriate
technology.
We tell kids, we challenge
kids to play superheroes.
So they know that when
they enter the game
they have to mobilise
their neighbourhood
to build a sustainable
neighbourhood,
the neighbourhood
of their dreams,
to be the oasis in the
whole neighbourhood.
We need the creativity
of young people.
We need the genius
And we need the leadership
of young people.
So peace and abundant
blessings, everybody.
Can we please—I invite
you, if you’re breathing,
I invite you—to just
take a really, really, really
deep breath.
[Breathing]
So what we’ve been able
to do is build a website
where we reach
1,000 people a day,
every day, who are coming
in to learn from us.
We are feeling a call
for building an ecovillage
in Brazil.
It will be an experiment and
we’re feeling excited for it.
We are the middle
children of history,
coming of age at the
crossroads of civilization.
A generation rising
between an old world dying,
and a new world being born.
We are the make it or
break it generation.
The all or nothing generation.
There is no shortage of time.
Time is not an enemy.
Time is not running out.
Time is coming.
It’s a journey.
We’ve been on it for, I don’t
know, 4.5 billion years.
Let’s not hurry, okay.
Let’s just be gentle
with each other.
Ah.... Look around you.
This is, in part, what
I envision for Alethia.
I’ve always told
my wife—I don’t
like to call her my
wife, she’s something
deeper than that
role—but, I’ve always
talked to EJ, that’s her
name, about the kind of world
we would like to see
Alethia grow up in.
The seven generations
that are coming forward,
that’s how I was raised.
You think seven
generations ahead.
Period.
A world where people are
not disrespected because
of the colour of their skin.
Do we have the ability
to let diversity
reshape our worldview.
People are not
divided and broken down
according to social mobility.
All parties coming
together to talk
about what is their problem?
What are their grievances?
Why they are fighting?
Talk together.
Where people are not poor
because of a social arrangement
that actually
guarantees poverty.
We can listen to what their
needs are and offer tools
that we happen to have that
they may choose to use, or not
choose to use, in humility
to say, how can we help?
You don’t have to do anything
to be worthy to be celebrated.
You are already celebrated.
You are already beautiful.
You don’t have to aspire
to look like Beyonce.
The change doesn’t really
start with the elites.
I mean, they’re
more of a symptom.
They are more of a thermometer.
A world where she won’t have
to wake up in the morning
and say, oh my god,
it’s another Monday.
I’m daring to be great.
And I’m inviting you and you
to dare to be great, too.
Anything that anybody
does that is for life
automatically makes you a
revolutionary for our species.
A worldwide collective,
so that we begin to talk
about the one humanity,
the interconnection of all.
♪ There are
many, there are many,
♪ there are many voices calling.
♪ Who can hear the mother,
hear the mother crying.
♪ Whoa come on now, whoa
it’s time, it’s time
♪ to care for Earth.
♪ Whoa come on now, whoa
it’s time, it’s time
♪ to care for Earth.
All is well, including
our perception
that it’s all terribly wrong.
♪ There are
many, there are many,
♪ there are many children crying.
There’s something
in here’s shifted.
♪ Who can feel the
mother, feel the mother crying.
Collective intelligence
to create all the solutions
we might need.
♪ Whoa come
on now, whoa it’s time,
♪ it’s time to care for Earth.
The largest step that
humanity’s ever taken before.
♪ Whoa come
on now, whoa it’s time,
♪ it’s time to care for Earth.
What are my possibilities now?
How can I bring that
love into action?
♪ There is drought
and there is famine,
♪ there are floods
that fill in the land.
There is a conscious and
intelligent force moving
humanity.
♪ There are heatwaves
and there are strong winds that
♪ blow the desert sand.
Life is more than a story.
And so are we.
♪ Whoa come
on now, whoa it’s time,
♪ it’s time to care for Earth.
We’ve got to get
through that opposite
before we can get to the
simplicity of love.
♪ Whoa come
on now, whoa it’s time,
♪ it’s time to care for Earth.